good evening on behalf of the Commission
on Presidential Debates I am pleased to
welcome you to the second presidential
debate
I am Bernard Shaw of CNN cable news
network my colleagues on the panel are
Ann Compton of ABC News Margaret Warner
of Newsweek magazine and aundrea
Mitchell of NBC News the candidates our
Vice President George Bush the
Republican nominee and governor Michael
Dukakis
[Music]
for the next 90 minutes we will be
questioning the candidates following a
format designed and agreed to by
representatives of the two campaigns
however there are no restrictions on the
questions that my colleagues and I can
ask this evening and the candidates have
no prior knowledge of our questions by
agreement between the candidates the
first question goes to governor Dukakis
you have two minutes to respond governor
if Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered
would you favor an irrevocable death
penalty for the killer no I don't
Bernard and I think you know that I've
opposed the death penalty during all of
my lives I don't see any evidence that
it's the deterrent and I think there are
better and more effective ways to deal
with violent crime we've done so in my
own state and it's one of the reasons
why we have had the biggest drop in
crime of any industrial state in America
why we have the lowest murder rate of
any industrial state in America
but we have work to do in this nation we
have work to do to fight a real war not
a phony war against drugs and that's
something that I want to lead something
we haven't had over the course of the
past many years even though the Vice
President has been at least allegedly in
charge of that war we have much to do to
step up that war to double the number of
drug enforcement agents to fight both
here and abroad to work with our
neighbors in this Hemisphere and I want
to call a hemispheric summit just as
soon after the 20th of January as
possible to fight that war but we also
have to deal with drug education
prevention here at home and that's one
of the things that I hope I can lead
personally is the president the United
States we've had great success in my own
state and we've reached out to young
people and their families and been able
to help them by beginning drug education
and prevention in the early elementary
grades so we can fight this war and we
can win this war and we can do so in a
way that marshals our forces it provides
real support for state and local law
enforcement officers who have not been
getting that kind of support do it away
which will bring down violence in this
nation we
helped our youngsters to say away from
drugs will stop this avalanche of drugs
as pouring into the country and will
make it possible for our kids and our
families to grow up in safe and secure
and decent neighborhoods mr. vice
president
your one-minute rebuttal well a lot of
what this campaign is about it seems to
me Bernie just a question of values and
here I do have on this particular
question a big difference with my
opponent you see I do believe that some
crimes are so heinous so brutal so
outrageous and I'd say particularly
those that result in the death of a
police officer
they put those real brutal crimes I do
believe in the death penalty and I think
it is a deterrent and I believe we need
it and I'm glad that the Congress moved
on this drug bill and have finally
called for that related to these
narcotics drug kingpins and so we just
have an honest difference of opinion I
support it and he doesn't now do you
advise President Bush I quote to you
this from article three of the twentieth
Amendment of the Constitution quote if
at the time fixed for the beginning of
the term of the president the president
elect shall have died the Vice
president-elect shall become president
meaning if you are elected and die
before inauguration day automatically
automatically Dan Quayle would become
the 41st president of the United States
what have you to say about that
possibility I'd have a confident Senate
and I made a good selection and I've
never seen such a pounding an unfair
pounding on a young senator in my entire
life and I've never seen a presidential
campaign where the presidential nominee
runs against my vice presidential
nominee never
before but you know Lloyd Bentsen jumped
on on dan quayle when dan quayle said he
had roughly the same amount of
experience he had two terms in the
congressman he had two terms in the
Senate serving his second term he
founded the authored the job training
partnership act that says to American
working men and women that are thrown
out of work for no fault of their own
that they're gonna have jobs we're
moving into a new competitive age and we
need that kind of thing he unlike my
opponent is an expert in national
defense helped amend the INF treaty so
we got a good sound treaty when these
people over here we're talking about a
freeze if we'd listened to them we would
never have had a treaty and so I have
great confidence in him and he's good
it's it's turning around you know the
American people are fair they don't like
it when there's an unfair pounding and
kind of hooting about people they want
to judge it on a record itself and so
I'm proud of my choice and you know I
don't think age is the only criterion
but I'll tell you something I'm proud
that people that are 30 years old and 40
years old now have someone in their
generation that is going to be vice
president of the United States of
America I made a good selection the
American people are seeing it and I am
proud of it that's what I'd say and he
could do the job governor Dukakis your
one-minute rebuttal Bernard this was the
first presidential decision that we as
nominees would call to plan to make
that's why people are so concerned
because it was an opportunity for us to
demonstrate what we were looking for in
a running mate more than that it was the
first national security decision that we
had to make vice president talks about
national security three times since
World War two the vice president has had
to suddenly become the president
commander in chief I picked Lloyd
Bentsen because I thought he was the
best qualified person for the job mr.
Bush
mr. Bush pick Dan Quayle and before he
did it he said watch my choice for vice
president it will tell all and it sure
did and Compton for the vice president
Thank You Bernie
mr. vice president yes we read your lips
no new taxes despite that same pledge
from President Reagan after income tax
rates were cut in each of the last five
years some federal taxes have gone up on
Social Security cigarettes liquor even
long-distance telephone calls now that's
money straight out of people's wallets
isn't the phrase no new taxes misleading
the voters no because that's and I'm
pledged to that and yes some taxes have
gone up and the main point is taxes have
been cut and yet income is up to the
federal government by 25% in the last
three years and so what I want to do is
keep this expansion going I don't want
to kill it off by a tax increase more
Americans at work today than at any time
in the history of this country and a
greater percentage of the workforce and
the way you kill expansions is to raise
taxes and I don't want to do that and I
won't do that and what I have proposed
is something much better and it's going
to take discipline of the executive
branch it's going to take discipline of
the Congressional branch and that is
what I call a flexible freeze that
allows growth about 4% or the rate of
inflation but does not permit the
Congress just to add on spending I hear
this talk about a blank check the
American people are pretty smart they
know who writes out the checks and they
know who appropriates the money it is
the United States Congress and by two to
one
Congress is blamed for these deficits
and the answer is to discipline both the
executive branch and the Congressional
branch by holding the line on taxes so I
am pledged to do that and those
pessimist
who say it can't be done I'm sorry I
just have a fundamental disagreement
with them governor Dukakis you're a
one-minute response and the vice
president made that pledge he's broken
it three times in the past year already
so it isn't worth the paper it's printed
on and what I'm concerned about is that
if we continue with the policies that
mr. Bush is talking about here this
evening a flexible freeze somebody
described it the other day as a kind of
economic Slurpee he wants to spend
billions on virtually every weapon
system around says he's not gonna raise
taxes though he has broken that pledge
repeatedly he says he wants to give the
wealthiest 1% of the people in this
country a five-year forty billion dollar
tax break and we're gonna pay for it and
he's been proposing all kinds of
programs for new spending costing
billions now if we continue with these
policies this trillion and a half
dollars worth of new debt that's already
been added on the backs of the American
taxpayer is gonna increase even more and
if we continue with this for another
four years then I'm worried about the
next generation whether we can ever turn
this situation around no we need a chief
executive was prepared to lead who won't
blame the Congress but will lead will
bring down that deficit we'll make tough
choices on charter we'll go out and do
the job that we expect of him and do it
with the Congress of the United States
and to governor Dukakis governor let me
follow up on that by asking you've said
it many times that you have balanced ten
budgets in a row in Massachusetts are
you promising the American people here
tonight that within a four year
presidential term you will balance the
federal budget no I'm not sure I can
promise that I don't think either one of
us can really there's no way of
anticipating what may happen I will say
this that will set as our goal a steady
gradual reduction of the deficit which
will require tough choices on spending
it will require a good strong rate of
economic growth that will require a plan
that the president works out with the
Congress doesn't blame them works it out
with them which brings that deficit down
it will require us to go out and collect
billions and billions of dollars in
taxes oh that aren't being paid in this
country and that's grossly unfair the
average American who's paying his taxes
and paying them on time and doesn't have
any alternative it's taken out of his
paycheck mr. Bush says we're gonna put
the IRS and every taxpayer that's not
what we're gonna do I'm for the taxpayer
Bill of Rights well I think it's
unconscionable in that we should be
talking or thinking about imposing new
taxes on average Americans when there
are billions out there over 100 billion
dollars in taxes owed that aren't being
paid now I think if we work together in
it and if you have a president that will
work with the Congress the American
people we can bring that deficit down
steadily 20 25 30 billion dollars a year
build economic growth build a good
strong future for America invest in
those things which we must invest in
economic development good jobs good
schools for our kids college opportunity
for young people decent health care and
affordable housing and a clean and safe
environment we can do all of those
things and at the same time build a
future in which we're standing out a
good strong fiscal foundation senator
Bentsen said as you recall at the debate
with Senator Quayle that if you give any
of us two hundred billion dollars worth
of hot checks a year we can create an
illusion of prosperity but sooner or
later that credit card mentality isn't
going to work and I want to bring to the
White House a sense of strength and
fiscal responsibility which will build a
good strong foundation under which this
country or above which this country can
move grow
invest and build the best America for
its people and for our kids and our
grandkids mr. vice president the
governor has balanced the budget in his
state he's required to by law he's
raised taxes several times I wish he
would join me as a matter of fact in
appealing to the American people for the
balanced budget amendment for the
federal government and for the line-item
veto I'd like to have that line-item
veto for the president because I think
that would be extraordinarily helpful
and I won't do one other thing that he's
had to do took 29 million dollars out of
his state pension fund that's equivalent
in the federal level of taking out of
the Social Security trust fund I'm not
going to do that I won't do that
and so I I'm still a little unclear as
to whether he's for or against a tax
increase I have been off for the
taxpayers Bill of Rights all along and
this idea of unleashing a whole bunch an
army of conventional force army of IRS
agents into everybody's kitchen I mean
he's against most defense matters and
now he wants to get an army of IRS
auditors going out there I'm against
that
I opposed that
[Applause]
I'm going to say this and I'm going to
say it wants to every person in this
auditorium what these candidates are
about is about most seriousness to the
American voters they should be heard and
you should be quiet if you are not quiet
I'm going to implore the candidates to
do something about crowding are quieting
their own partisans but we cannot get
through this program with these
outbursts Margaret Warner for governor
Dukakis good evening governor mr. vice
president governor you won the first
debate on intellect and yet you lost it
on heart
the American president agrees with that
the American public admired your
performance but didn't seem to like you
much now Ronald Reagan has found his
personal warmth to be a tremendous
political asset do you think that a
present president has to be likable to
be an effective leader market may I go
back and just say to the vice president
that I didn't raid the pension fund in
Massachusetts you're dead wrong George
we didn't do that there's a matter of
fact I'm the first governor in the
history of my state to fund that pension
system and I'm very proud of that and
you just happen to know who did that
no we did not I've been in politics for
25 years Margaret I've won a lot of
Elections I've lost a few as you know
and learn from those losses I won the
Democratic nomination in 51 separate
contests I think I'm a reasonably
likable guy I'm serious
oh I think I'm a little more lovable
these days and I used to be back in my
youth when I began in my state
legislature but I'm also a serious guy I
think the presidency of the United
States is a very serious office and I
think we have to address these issues in
a very serious way so I hope and expect
that I'll be liked by the people of this
country as Prez of the United States I
certainly hope I'll be liked by them on
the 8th of November but I also think
it's important to be somebody who's
willing to make those tough choices now
we've just heard two or three times the
vice president he's not gonna raise
taxes I repeat within days after you
made that pledge you're broken he said
well maybe as a last resort we'll do it
and you've supported legislation this
year that's involved in tax increases
not once but twice
so that pledge isn't realistic and I
think the vice president knows it I
think the people of this country note
the fact of the matter is that the next
press the United States is going to have
to go to the White House seriously he's
gonna have to work with a Congress
seriously you can't turn to the Congress
and blame them for the fact that we
don't have a balanced budget we have
billions and billions of dollars and red
ink and I'm going to be a president who
is serious I hope it expect will be
liked by the American people but more
than that do the kind of job that I'm
elected to do we'll do it with as much
good humor as I can but at the same time
we'll do it in a way which will achieve
the goals we want for ourselves and our
people and I think we know what they are
they're a good strong future a future in
which they're talking to all of our
citizens one minute from the vice
president
I don't think it's a question of whether
people like you or not to make you an
effective leader I think it's whether
you share the broad dreams of the
American people whether you have
confidence in the people's ability to
get things done or whether you think it
all should be turned over as many of the
Liberals do to Washington DC you see I
think it's a question of values not
likeability or love ability it's a
question in foreign affairs of
experience knowing world leaders knowing
how to build on a superb record of this
administration in arms control because
you'd know exactly how to begin you have
to learn from
experience that making unilateral cuts
in defense system is not the way that
you enhance the print piece you've got
to understand that it is only the United
States that can stand for freedom and
democracy around the world and we can't
turn it over to the United Nations or
other multilateral organizations it is
though trying to understand the
heartbeat of the country and I know
these campaigns get knocked a lot but I
think I'd be a better president now for
having had to travel to these
communities and understand the family
values and the importance of
neighborhood Margaret Warner for the
vice president I'd like to follow up on
that mr. vice president the tenor of the
campaign you've been running in terms of
both the issues and your rhetoric has
surprised even some of your friends
Senator Mark Hatfield has known your
family a long time and who your father
of the late Senator Prescott Bush said
and I quote if his father were alive
today I'm sure his father would see it
as a shocking transformation the senator
Hatfield right what was he referring to
he was referring to your performance in
the campaign I think my faith my dad
would be pretty proud of me because I
think we've come a long long way and I
think you know three months ago I
remember some of the great publications
in this country had written me off and
what I've had to do is to define not
just my position but to define his and I
hope I've done it fairly and the reason
I've had to do that is that he ran on
the left in the Democratic primary ran
firmly and ran with conviction and ran
on his record and then at that
Democratic convention they made a
determination and they said their
ideology doesn't matter just competence
and in the process the negatives began
it wasn't me that was there at that
convention thank God I was up in the
with Jimmy Baker camping out and I
didn't have to hear all the personal
attacks on me out of that Democratic
convention was wonderful not to have to
listen to it and I'm not the one that
compared the President of the United
States rotting from a like a dead fish
from the head
down I didn't do that but I have defined
the issues and I am NOT gonna let
governor Dukakis go through this
election without explaining some of
these very liberal position he's the one
that said I am a liberal traditional
liberal progressive liberal Democrat
he's the one that brought up to garner
primary votes the whole question of the
ACLU and I have enormous difference with
the ACLU on their political agenda not
on their defending some minority opinion
on the right or the left I support that
but what I don't like is this left-wing
political agenda and therefore I have to
help define that and if he's unwilling
to do it if he says ideology doesn't
matter I don't agree with him one minute
from governor Dukakis well market we've
heard it again tonight and I'm not
surprised to the labels I guess the vice
president called me a liberal two or
three times said I was coming from the
left 1980 President Reagan called you a
liberal for voting federal gun control
and this is something Republicans have
used for a long time they tried it with
Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman and
John Kennedy it's not labels it's our
vision of America and we have two
fundamentally different visions of
America Vice President is complacent
thinks we got to stick with the status
quo doesn't think we ought to move ahead
thinks things are okay as they are I
don't I think this is a great country
because we've always wanted to do better
to make our country better to bank our
lives better we've always been a nation
which was ambitious for America and we
move forward and that's the kind of
America I want that's the kind of
leadership I want to provide but I don't
think these labels mean a thing and I
would hope that tonight and in the
course of the rest of this campaign we
can have our good solid disagreements on
issues it's nothing the matter with that
let's stop labeling each other and let's
let's get to the heart of the matter
which is the future of this country
Andreea Mitchell for the vice president
mr. vice president governor mr. vice
president let me return for a moment to
the issue of the budget because so much
has already been put off limits in your
campaign that most people do not believe
that the flexible fries alone will solve
the problem of the deficit so let's turn
to defense for a moment Pentagon
officials tell us that there is not
enough money in the budget to handle
military readiness preparedness as well
as new weapons systems that have been
proposed as well as those already in the
pipeline you were asked at the first
debate what new weapon systems you would
cut you mentioned three that had already
been cancelled can you tonight share
with us three new weapon systems that
you would cut I knew of three new weapon
systems that I thought were purely waste
and weren't protected by the Congress
they wouldn't be in the budget they
would not be in the budget but you want
one now I'll give you one that Hemet
that heavy truck that's costs what is it
eight hundred and fifty million dollars
and that Pentagon didn't request it and
yet a member of Congress a very powerful
one put it in the budget I think we can
save money through this whole very
sophisticated concept Andrea that I know
you do understand of competitive
strategies it is new and it is very very
different than what's happened but it's
not quite ready to be totally
implemented but it's very important I
think we can save through the Packard
Commission report and I'm very proud
that David Packard the originator of
that report is strongly supporting me so
it's not a question of saying our budget
is full of a lot of waste I don't
believe that I do think this we're in
the serious stages of negotiation with
the Soviet Union now on the strategic
arms control talks and we are protecting
a cup of options in terms of modernizing
our strategic forces my Secretary of
Defense is going to have to make a very
difficult decision in which system to go
forward with but we are protecting both
of them we're moving forward with the
negotiations and you see I just think it
would be dumb negotiating policy with
the so V
it's to cut out one or the other of the
two options right now the Soviets are
modernizing they continue to modernize
and we can't simply say we've got enough
nuclear weapons let's freeze we can't do
that we have to have modernization
especially if we achieve the 50%
reduction in strategic weapons that our
@ president is taking the leadership to
attain and so that's the way I'd reply
to it and I believe we can have the
strongest and best defense possible if
we modernize if we go forward with
competitive strategies and if we do
follow through on the Packard Commission
report governor Dukakis one minute
Landrieu we just had another example of
why the vice president's mathematics
just doesn't add up I think you know
because you've covered these issues that
there's no way that we can build all of
the weapon systems the vice president
says he wants to build within the
existing defense budget everybody knows
that including the people the Pentagon
now my defense secretary is gonna have
to a lot to do with some of those
decisions but it's going to be the
president that's gonna have to Oliver
Lee decide before that budget goes to
the Congress what weapons systems are
gonna go and what are gonna stay we are
not gonna spend the billions and
trillions that mr. Bush wants to spend
on Star Wars we're not gonna spend
billions on MX's on railroad cars which
is a weapon system we don't need can't
afford and won't help our defense
posture at all we're not gonna spend
hundreds of millions in a space plane
from Washington Tokyo those are
decisions that the chief executive has
to make yes we're gonna have a strong
incredible and effective nuclear
deterrent we're gonna go forward with
the stealth d5 and the advanced cruise
missile in good conventional forces but
the next prize in the United States will
have to make some tough and difficult
decisions I'm prepared to make them
governor the Vice President is not
aundrea
has a question for you
govenor continuing on that subject then
you say that we have to do something
about conventional forces you have
supported the submarine-launched missile
the d5 you just referred to yet from
Jerry Ford to Jimmy Carter to Ronald
Reagan there is a bipartisan consensus
in favor of modernizing the land-based
missiles now you have ruled out the MX
and the midget men more recently some of
your aides have hinted at some
flexibility that you might show about
some other new form of missile can you
tell us tonight why you have rejected
the collective wisdom of people as
diverse as Sam nan Henry Kissinger Al
Gore people in both parties and what
type of land-based missile would you
consider Calandra today we have 13,000
strategic nuclear warheads on land on
air in the sea that's an incredibly
powerful nuclear deterrent I don't rule
out modernization and there are
discussions going on now into Congress I
know the Pentagon about a less expensive
modernized land-based leg of the Triad
but there are limits to what we can span
there are limits to this nation's
ability to finance these weapon systems
and one of the things that the vice
president either ignores or won't
address is the fact that you can't
divorce our military security from our
economic secure how can we build a
strong America militarily that's
teeter-tottering on a mountain of debt
and if we go forward with the kinds of
policies that the Vice President is
suggesting tonight and has in the past
that debts going to grow bigger and
bigger and bigger so military security
and economic security go hand in hand
and we will have a strong and effective
and credible nuclear deterrent we're
gonna have conventional forces that are
well-maintained well-equipped
well-trained well supported and we have
serious problems with our conventional
forces at the present time and they'll
get worse unless we have a president who
was willing to make some of these
decisions and we also have important
domestic priorities in education and
housing and health care in economic
development in job training and the
environment now all of these things are
gonna have to be addressed and that's
why I say again to all of you out there
who have too
deal with your household budgets and
know how difficult it is that the next
president has to do the same I want the
men and women of our armed forces to
have the support they need to defend us
the support they need when they risk our
lives to keep us free and to keep this
country free we cannot continue to live
on a credit card we can not continue to
tell the American people that we're
gonna build all of these systems and at
the same time invest in important things
here at home and be serious about
building a strong and good America and
that's the kind of America I want to
build one minute for the vice president
farm us we start the clock over I held
off for the applause can I get you can
proceed sir
I think the foremost responsibilities of
a president really gets down to the
national security of this country the
governor talks about limits what we
can't do poses these two modernization
systems talks now about may well we'll
develop some new kind of a missile takes
8 years 10 years to do that he talked
about a nuclear freeze back at the time
when I was in Europe trying to convince
European public opinion that we ought to
go forward with the deployment of the
INF weapons and thank God the freeze
people were not heard they were wrong
and the result is we deployed and the
Soviets kept deploying and then we
negotiated from strength and now we have
the first arms control agreement in the
nuclear age to ban weapons you just
don't make unilateral cuts in the naive
hope that the Soviets are gonna behave
themselves world peace is important and
we have enhanced the pace and I'm proud
to have been a part of an administration
that is done exactly that peace through
strength works and Compton for governor
Dukakis governor today they may call
them role models but they used to be
called heroes the kind of public figure
who could inspire a whole generation
someone who was larger than life my
question is not who your heroes were my
question instead is who are the heroes
who
there in American life today who are the
ones that you would point out to young
Americans as figures who should inspire
this country well I think when I think
of Heroes I think back not presently and
but there are many people who I admire
in this country today some of them are
in public life and Senate the Congress
some of my fellow governors who are real
heroes to me I think of those young
athletes who represented us the Olympics
were tremendously impressive we were
proud of them we felt strongly about
them and they did so well by us I can
think of doctors and scientists Jonas
Salk who for example discovered a
vaccine which cured one of the most
dread diseases we have a had and he's a
hero
I think of classroom teachers classroom
teachers that I have had classroom
teachers that youngsters have today who
are real heroes to our young people
because they inspire them they teach
them but more than that they are role
models members the clergy who have done
the same drug counselors out there in
the street who were providing help to
youngsters who come up to me and others
and ask for help and want help them
doing the hard work the heroic work
which it takes to provide that kind of
leadership that kind of counseling that
kind of support I think of people in the
law-enforcement community who are taking
the Alive's in their hands every day
when they go up in one of those doors
and kick it down and try to stop this
flow of drugs into our communities and
into our kids so there are many many
heroes in this country today these are
people that give of themselves every day
and every week and every month many
cases they're people in the community
who are examples and our role models and
I would hope that one of the things that
I could do is present is to recognize
them to give them the kind of
recognition that they need and deserve
so that more and more young people can
themselves become the heroes of tomorrow
can go into public service can go into
teaching wound into drug counseling go
into law enforcement and be heroes
themselves to generations you have to
come one minute for Vice President Bush
I think
teacher right here largely Hispanic
school I'm a Escalante teaching calculus
two young kids 80% of them going on to
college I think of a young man and now
in this country named via Daris who was
released from a Cuban jail came out and
told the troop in this brilliant book
against all hope about what is actually
happening in in Cuba I think of those
people that took us back into space
again Rick how can that crew is people
that are worthy of this I agree with the
governor on on athletics and there's
nothing corny about having sports heroes
young people that are clean and
honorable and out there setting a
setting of pace I think a doctor pouchy
probably never heard of you did and
heard him he's a very fine research top
doctor at National Institute of Health
working hard doing something about
research on this disease of AIDS but
look I also think we ought to give a
little credit to the President of the
United States he is the one that has
gotten us that first arms control
agreement and the cynics abounded and he
is leaving office with a popularity at
an all-time high American people say is
our hero Ann has a question for you mr.
vice president let's change the pace a
little bit mr. vice president in this
campaign some hard and very bitter
things have been spoken by each side
about each side if you'd consider for a
moment governor Dukakis and his years of
public service
is there anything nice you can say about
him anything you find Admirals listen
you're stealing my clothes I have
something very nice to say
somebody leaked my tell you what now let
me tell you something about that and
Barbara and I were sitting there before
that Democratic convention and we saw
the governor and his son on television
the night before in his family and his
mother who was there and was I'm saying
to Barbara you know we've always kept
family as a bit of an oasis for us you
all know me and we've held it back a
little but we use that as a role model
the way he took understandable pride in
his heritage but his family means to him
and we've got a strong family and we
watched that and we said hey we got to
unleash the bush kids and so you saw 10
grandchildren there and jumping all over
their grandfather at the at the
convention you see our five kids all
over this country and their spouses and
so I would say that the concept of
Dukakis family has my great respect and
I'd say that I don't know that's kind or
not it's just an objective statement and
I think the man anybody that gets into
this political arena and has to face you
guys every day deserves a word of praise
because it's gotten a little ugly out
there it's got a little nasty it's not
much fun sometimes and I would cite
again Dan Quayle I've been in politics a
long time and I don't remember that kind
of piling on that kind of ugly rumor
that never was true printed now come on
so some of it's unfair but he's in the
arena Teddy Roosevelt used to talk about
the arena you know daring to fail
greatly or succeed no matter he's in
there
so I salute these things I salute those
who participate in the political process
Sam Rayburn had a great expression on
this he said you know here all these
intellectuals out there griping and
complaining and Santas negative coverage
Rayburn says yeah and that guy never ran
for sheriff either Michael Dukakis has
run for sheriff and so has George Bush
governor hey one minute respond sir
I didn't hear the word liberal or left
one time I thank you bad that's true and
doesn't that prove the point George
which is that values like family and
education community decent homes for
young people that family in Long Island
I visited on Monday were Lou and Betty
to lhamo bought a house for some $19,000
back in 1962 have had seven children
we're all making good livings they can't
live in the community and which they
will grew up which they grew up in those
are basic American values I believe in
them I think you believe you're not left
or right they're decent American values
I guess the one thing that concerns me
about this end is this attempt to label
things which all of us believe in we may
have different approaches you may think
that you deal with them in different
ways but they're basically American I
believe in them George Bush believes in
them I think the vast majority of
Americans believe in them and I hope
governor the tone we've just heard might
just be the tone we have the rest of the
campaign I think the American people
would appreciate that Margaret Warner
for the vice president vice president
bush abortion remains with us it's a
very troubling issue and I'd like to
explore that for a minute with you you
have said that you regard abortionist
murder yet you would make exceptions in
the case of rape and incest my question
is why should a woman who discovers
through amniocentesis that her baby will
be born with tay-sachs disease for
instance that the baby will live at most
two years and those two years in
incredible pain be forced to carry the
fetus to term and yet a woman who
becomes pregnant through incest would be
allowed to abort her fetus because you
left out one other exception the health
of the mother let me answer your
question and I hope it doesn't get too
personal or maudlin bar and I lost a
child you know that we lost the daughter
Robin and we took we were out I was over
running records in West Texas
and I got a call from her come home went
to the went to the doctor doctor said
beautiful child your your child has a
few weeks to live and I said what can we
do about it
said no she has leukemia acutely kami a
few weeks to live
we took the child in New York thanks to
the miraculous sacrifice of doctors and
nurses the child stayed alive for six
months and then died if that child were
here today and I was told the same thing
my granddaughter Noelle for example that
child could stay alive for 10 or 15
years or maybe for the rest of her life
and so I don't think if you make an
exception based on medical knowledge at
the time I think human life is very very
precious and and look this hasn't been
an easy decision for me to met work me I
know others disagree with it but when I
was in that little church across the
river from Washington and saw our
grandchild christened in our faith I was
very pleased indeed that the mother had
not aborted that child and put the child
up for adoption
and so I just feel this is where I'm
coming from and it is personal and I
don't assail him on that issue or others
on that issue but that's the way I judge
Bush feel about it one minute for
governor Dukakis Margaret Kitty and I
had very much the same kind of
experience the Bush's head we lost a
baby lived about 20 minutes after it was
born but isn't the real question that we
have to answer not how many exceptions
we make because the Vice President
himself is prepared to make exceptions
it's who makes the decision who makes
this very difficult very wrenching
decision
and I think it has to be the woman in
the exercise of her own conscience and
religious beliefs that that makes that
decision who are we to say well into
certain circumstances it's alright but I
rented circumstances it isn't that's a
decision that only a woman can make
after consulting her conscience and
consulting her religious principles and
I would hope that we would give to women
in this country the right to make that
decision and to make it in the exercise
of their conscience from religious
beliefs Governor Margaret has a question
for you governor I'd like to return to
the topic of the defense budget for a
minute you have said in this campaign
that you would maintain a stable defense
budget yet you are on the board on the
advice and incidentally may I say that
that's the decision of the Congress and
the president has concurred yet you are
on the board of a group called jobs with
peace in Boston that advocates a 25% cut
in the defense budget and the transfer
of that money to the domestic economy my
question is do you share that goal
perhaps as a long-range goal and if not
are you aware of or why do you permit
this group to continue to use your name
on its letterhead for fundraising well I
think I was on the Advisory Committee
Margaret no I don't have to share that
goal it's an example of how oftentimes
we may be associated with organizations
all of whose particular positions we
don't support even though we support in
general the hope that over time
particularly if we can get those
reductions in strategic weapons if we
can get a comprehensive test-ban treaty
if we can negotiate with the Soviet
Union and bring down the level of
conventional forces in Europe with
deeper cuts in the Soviet side yes at
some point it may be possible to reduce
defense outlays and use those four
important things here at home like jobs
and job training and college opportunity
and health and housing and the
environment and the things that all of
us care about but I do think this that
the next president even within a
relatively stable budget and that's what
we're gonna have for the foreseeable
future will have to make those tough
choices that I was talking about and
that mr. Bush doesn't seem to want to
make and that really
is going to be a challenge for the next
prize in the United States I don't think
there's any question about it but I also
see a tremendous opportunity now to
negotiate with the Soviet Union to build
on the progress that we've made with the
INF treaty which I strongly supported
and most Democrats did to get those
reductions in strategic weapons to get a
test ban treaty and to really make
progress on the reduction of
conventional forces in Europe but if we
can do that and do it in a way that gets
deeper cuts in the Soviet side which is
where they got to come from then I think
we have an opportunity over the long
haul to begin to move some of our
resources from the military to important
domestic priorities that can provide
college opportunity for that young woman
whose mother wrote me from Texas just
the other day from Longview Texas two
teachers mother and a father who have a
child it's a freshman college is an
electrical engineering major a very
bright student and they can't afford to
keep that child in college so I hope
that we can begin to move those
resources it's not gonna happen
overnight it certainly will have to
happen on a step-by-step basis as we
make progress in arms negotiation and
arms control and arms reduction but it's
certainly I got the long term goal of
all Americans and I think it is one
minute for the vice-president the
defense budget today takes far less
percentage of the gross national product
than it did in President Kennedy's time
for example move tremendously and you
see I think we're facing a real
opportunity for world peace this is a
big question and it's a question as to
whether the United States will continue
to lead for peace see I don't believe
any other country can pick up the mantle
I served at the UN I don't think we can
turn over these kinds of decision of the
collective defense to the United Nations
or anything else so what I'm saying is
we are gonna have to make choices I said
I would have the Secretary of Defense
sit down but while the president is
negotiating with the Soviet Union I
simply do not want to make these
unilateral cuts and I think those that
advocated the freeze missed the point
that there was a better way and that
better way has resulted in a principle
asymmetrical cuts Soviets take out more
than we do and the
principle of intrusive verification and
those two principles can now be applied
to conventional forces to strategic
forces provided a survey we don't give
away our hand before we sit down at the
head table Andre of Mitchell for
governor Dukakis governor you've said
tonight that you set as a goal the
steady reduction of the deficit and
you've talked about making tough choices
so perhaps I can get you to make one of
those tough choices no credible
economist and either party accepts as
realistic your plan to handle the
deficit by tightening tax collection
investing in economic growth bringing
down interest rates and cutting weapon
systems and some domestic programs only
some domestic programs as well so let's
assume now for argument purpose that it
is the spring of 1989 and you are
president Dukakis and you discover that
all of those economists were right and
you were wrong you are now facing that
dreaded last resort increased taxes
which tax do you decide is the least
owners I mean I disagree with the
premise of your question for the sake of
argument No
as a matter of reality I'm going to have
to because we have had not one but two
details studies which indicate that
there are billions and billions of
dollars to be collected that are not
being paid in these not taxes owed by
average Americans we don't have an
alternative we lose it when it's taken
out of our paycheck before we even get
it but it's the Internal Revenue Service
which estimates now that we aren't
collecting a hundred billion dollars or
more in taxes owed in this country and
that is just absolutely unfair to the
vast majority of Americans who pay their
taxes and pay them on time
the Dorgan task force which included two
Internal Revenue Commissioners one a
Republican former Internal Revenue
Commissioners one a Republican one a
Democrat was a bipartisan Commission
study by two respected economists which
indicated that we could collect some
forty forty five fifty billion dollars
of those funds the point is you've got
to have a president who's prepared to do
this and to begin right away and
preferably a president who is a governor
of a state has had very very successful
experience of doing this in my own state
we did it in other states we've done it
Republican governors as well as
Democratic governors and we've had great
success in revenue enforcement now the
Vice President probably tell you that
it's gonna take an army of IRS
collectors again well his campaign
manager who used to be the secretary of
the Treasury was taking great credit
about a year ago and asking and
receiving from the Congress substantial
additional funds to hire internal
revenue agents to go out and collect
these funds and I'm happy to join Jim
Baker saying that we agree on this but
the fact of the matter is that this is
something that we must begin it's going
to take at least the first year the new
administration but the Dorgan task force
the bipartisan task force estimate that
we could collect about thirty five
billion dollars in the fifth year 105
been in over five years the other study
even more than that and that's where you
begin one minute response mr. vice
president Landrieu you didn't predicate
that lack of economists support for what
I call a flexible freeze cuz some good
very good economy
do support that concept and I think
where I differ with the governor of
Massachusetts is I am optimistic they
jumped on me Esther you've being a
little optimistic about the United
States I am optimistic and I believe we
can keep this longest expansion going I
was not out there when that stock market
dropped wringing my hands and saying
this was the end of the world
as some political leaders were because
it isn't the end of the world and what
we have to do is restrain the growth of
spending and we are doing a better job
of it the Congress is doing a better job
of it and the dynamics work but they
don't work if you go raise taxes and
then the Congress spends it continues to
spend that the American working man and
woman are not taxed too little the
federal government continues to spend
too much hold it mr. vice president
Andreea has a question for you mr. vice
president you had flatly ruled out any
change in Social Security benefits even
for the wealthy now can you stand here
tonight and look a whole generation of
18 to 34 year olds in the eye the very
people who are going to have to be
financing that retirement and tell them
that they should be financing the
retirement of people like yourself like
governor Dukakis or for that matter
people such as ourselves here on this
panel more so you than me but we could
argue no but you got to go back to what
Social Security was when it was created
wasn't created as a welfare program
wasn't created that it was created as a
whole retirement or help supplement to
retirement program it wasn't created as
a welfare program so here's what's
happened we came in to office and the
Social Security trust fund was in great
jeopardy and the president took the
leadership working with the Democrats
and the Republicans in Congress some
tough calls were made and the Social
Security trust fund was put back into
sound solvent condition so I don't want
to fool around with it and her several
there's a good political reason because
it's just about this time of year
that the Democrats start saying the
Republicans are going to take away your
Social Security it always works that way
I've seen it in precinct politics in
Texas and I've seen it at the national
level we have made the Social Security
trust fund sound and it is going to be
operating at surpluses and I don't want
the Liberal Democratic Congress to spend
out of that Social Security trust fund
or go and take the money out for some
other purpose I don't want that and I
will not go in there and suggest changes
in Social Security I learned that the
hard way and the governor and I both
supported slipping the colas for one
year he supported at the National
Governors conference and I supported it
in breaking a tie in a major compromise
package and we got assailed by the
Democrats in the election over that and
I am going to keep that Social Security
trust fund sound and keep our commitment
to the elderly and maybe down the line
maybe when you get two decades or one
into the next century you're gonna have
to take another look at it but not now
we do not have to do it keep the trust
with the older men and women of this
country governor you have one minute sir
angry I don't know which George Bush I'm
listening to George Bush a few years ago
said that Social Security was basically
a welfare system and in 1985 he flew
back from the west coast to cut that : I
voted against that at the National
Governors Association we won a majority
we didn't win the 2/3 that was necessary
in order to pass that resolution George
but everybody knew what we were doing
and I've opposed that the reason that we
raise concerns not just in election
years but every year is because
Republicans once they're elected go in
there and start cutting you did it in
1985 the administration tried to do it
repeatedly repeatedly in 81 82 and I'm
sure you'll try to do it again because
there's no way that you can finance what
you want to spend there's no way you can
pay for that five-year forty billion
dollar tax cut for the rich and still
buy all those
weapon systems you want to buy unless
you raid the Social Security trust fund
and Compton for the vice president mr.
vice president
there are three justices of the Supreme
Court her in their 80s and it's very
likely the next president will get a
chance to put a lasting mark on the
Supreme Court before the record would
your nominees to the Supreme Court have
to pass something that has been called a
kind of conservative ideological litmus
test and would you give us an idea of
perhaps who two or three people on your
shortlist are for the court one I don't
have a list yet I feel pretty confident
tonight but not that confident secondly
secondly I don't have any litmus test
but what I would do is appoint people to
the federal bench that will not
legislate from the bench who will
interpret the Constitution I do not want
to see us go to again and I'm using this
word advisedly a liberal majority that
is going to legislate from the bench
they don't like the use of the word but
may I remind his strong supporters that
it only last year in the primary to
capture that Democratic nomination he
said I am a progressive liberal Democrat
I won't support the judges like that
there is no litmus test on any issue but
I will go out there and find men and
women to interpret and I don't have a
list but I think the appointments that
the president has made to the bench had
been outstanding outstanding
appointments governor do you have a one
minute response time if the vice
president United States thinks that
Robert Bork with an outstanding appoint
that is a very good reason for voting
for Mike Dukakis and Lloyd Bentsen in
the 8th of November and I think mr. Bush
supported the Bork nomination
you know mr. Bush has never pointed a
judge I've appointed over 130 so I have
a record and I'm very proud of it I
don't ask people whether they're
Republicans or Democrats I've appointed
prosecutors have appointed defenders I
don't appoint people I think are liberal
if people think I concerns well I think
are conservative I appoint people of
independence and integrity and
intelligence people who will be a credit
to the bench and those are the standards
that I will use in nominating people to
the Supreme Court of the United States
these appointments are for life these
appointments are for life and when the
vice president talks about liberals on
the bench I wonder who he's talking
about is he talking about a former
governor of the state of California who
was a former prosecutor government and a
Republican named Earl Warren because I
think Chief Justice Warren was an
outstanding Chief Justice and I think
most Americans do too Ann Compton has a
question for you governor Dukakis
governor millions of Americans are
entitled to some of the protections and
benefits that the federal government
provides including social security
pensions Medicare for the elderly
Medicaid for the poor but in fact there
are so many millions of Americans who
are eligible the government just can't
continue to pay for all of those
programs as they're currently
constituted a blue ribbon panel shortly
after the election is likely to
recommend that you go where the money is
when you make budget cuts and that means
entitlements before the election would
you commit yourself to any of those hard
choices such as which one of those
entitlements ought to be redrawn Andrew
why do people who want to balance
budgets or bring the deficit down always
go to those programs which tend to
benefit people of very modest means no
two-thirds of the people in this country
who receive Social Security checks live
entirely on that check they have no
other income and yet mr. Bush tried to
cut their cost of living increase in
1985 met
care is not getting less expensive
medical care for the elderly is getting
more expensive with greater deductibles
with fewer benefits the kinds of things
we've had under this administration that
have cut and chopped and reduced the
kinds of benefits that one gets under
Medicare yes we now have catastrophic
health insurance but it's gonna cost and
that's gonna be an additional burden on
elderly citizens it had bipartisan
support it should have had by part of
the support that I suggest that we
understand that those are going to be
additional costs on senior citizens
across this country so I'm not going to
begin and I'm not going to go to
entitlements as a means for cutting that
deficit when we're spending billions on
something like Star Wars when we're
spending billions on other weapon
systems which apparently the
vice-president wants to keep it as back
pocket or someplace but which if we
continue to spend billions on them will
force us to cut Social Security to cut
Medicare to cut these basic entitlements
to people of very very modest means now
there are some things we can do to help
people who currently do get entitlements
to get off of public assistance I talked
to our first debate about the
possibilities of helping minions and
mittens of welfare families to get off
of welfare and I'm proud to say that we
finally have a welfare reform bill and
the Ruby Sampson's and Donna Lawson's
hundreds of thousands of welfare mothers
in this country and in my state across
the country who today are working and
earning or examples of what can happen
when you provide training for those
welfare mothers some daycare for their
children's those mothers can go into a
training program and go get a job that's
the way you bring a deficit down and
help to improve the quality of life of
people at the same time one minute for
the vice president I think I've
addressed it but let me simply say for
the record I did not vote to cut colas
and I voted the same way that he did
three months before in a national
Governor's Conference and he said at
that time quote and this is a paraphrase
of fries that's easy
so I don't believe that we need to do
what you've suggested here and I've said
that I'm gonna keep this Social Security
entitlement to keep that trust fund
sound but I do think there are flexible
ways to solve some of the pressing
problems particularly that affect our
children and I have made some good sound
proposals but again we've got a big
difference on childcare for example you
see I want the families to have the
choice I don't want to see the federal
government licensing grandmother's I
don't want to see the the federal
government saying to communities well
you can't do this anymore we're gonna
tell you how to do it all
I want flexibility and I do you know
these people laugh about the thousand
points of life you ought to go out and
sit light you gotta go out and see
around this country what's happening in
the volunteer sector American helping
America and I want to keep it alive in
childcare and in other entitlements
Margaret Warner for governor Dukakis
governor I'm gonna pass on the question
I originally plan to ask you to follow
up on your rebuttal to a question Andrea
asked and that involves Social Security
now it is true as you said that
originally you sought an exemption for
Social Security colas in this National
Governors Association vote but when you
lost that vote you then endorsed the
overall fries proposal and what's more
you had great criticism of your fellow
governors who wouldn't go along as
political cowards you said you said it
takes guts well it was absolutely not
true it had nothing to do with a debate
on Social Security and had to do with
the discussion we had had the previous
day and my overall question of reducing
my question is aren't you demagoguing
I have to I have to
[Applause]
I just have to correct the record that
simply isn't true now we're not a
parliamentary body the National
Governors Association we vote on
resolutions if you don't get a 2/3 then
your resolution doesn't pass but
everybody knew that those of us who
voted against the freezing of colas did
so we did so emphatically and I never
made that statement never would the
point is that as we look at this
nation's future and we have two very
different visions of this future I want
to move ahead the vice president talks
about a thousand points of light I'm
interested in 240 million points of
light I'm interested in 240 million
citizens in this country to share in the
American dream all of them in every part
of this country but as we look at the
decisions that the next president the
United States is going to have to make I
just don't believe the place you go
first is those programs those so-called
entitlements which provide a basic floor
of income and in a modest amount of
medical care for the elderly for the
disabled for people cut Social Security
to cut Medicare to cut these basic
entitlements to people of very very
modest means now there are some things
we can do to help people who currently
do get entitlements to get off of public
assistance I talked to our first debate
about the possibilities of helping
minions and mittens of welfare families
to get off of welfare and I'm proud to
say that we finally have a welfare
reform bill and the Ruby Sampson's and
Donna Lawson's hundreds of thousands of
welfare mothers in this country and in
my state across the country who today
are working and earning are examples of
what can happen when you provide
training for those welfare mothers some
take care for their children's those
mothers can go into a training program
and go get a job that's the way you
bring a deficit down and help to improve
the quality of life of people at the
same time one minute for the vice
president I think I've addressed it but
let me simply say for the record I did
not vote to cut colas and I voted the
same way that he did three months before
in a national Governor's Conference and
he said at that time quote and this is a
paraphrase a freeze that's
easy so I don't believe that we need to
do what you've suggested here and I've
said that I'm going to keep this social
security entitlement to keep that trust
fund sound but I do think there are
flexible ways to solve some of the
pressing problems particularly that
affect our children and I have made some
good sound proposals but again we've got
a big difference on childcare for
example you see I want the families to
have the choice I don't want to see the
federal government licensing
grandmothers I don't want to see the the
federal government saying to communities
well you can't do this anymore we're
gonna tell you how to do it all
I want flexibility and I do you know
these people laugh about the thousand
points of life you ought to go out and
sit light you ought to go out and see
around this country what's happening in
the volunteer sector American helping
America and I want to keep it alive in
childcare and in other entitlements
Margaret Warner for governor Dukakis
governor I'm gonna pass on the question
I originally plan to ask you to follow
up on your rebuttal to a question Andrea
asked and that involves Social Security
now it is true as you said that
originally you sought an exemption for
Social Security colas in this National
Governors Association vote but when you
lost that vote you then endorsed the
overall fries proposal and what's more
you had great criticism of your fellow
governors who wouldn't go along as
political cowards you said absolutely
not who said it takes guts well it was
absolutely not true it had nothing to do
with a debate on Social Security it had
to do with the discussion we had had the
previous day and the overall question of
reducing my question is aren't you
demagoguing
I have to I have to
I just have to correct the record that
simply isn't true now we're not a
parliamentary body the National
Governors Association we vote on
resolutions if you don't get a 2/3 then
your resolution doesn't pass but
everybody knew that those of us who
voted against the freezing of colas did
so we did so emphatically and I never
made that statement never would the
point is that as we look at this
nation's future and we have two very
different visions of this future I want
to move ahead the vice president talks
about a thousand points of light I'm
interested in 240 million points of
light I'm interested in 240 million
citizens in this country who share in
the American dream all of them in every
part of this country but as we look at
the decisions that the next president
the United States is going to have to
make I just don't believe the place you
go first is those programs those
so-called entitlements which provide a
basic floor of income and in a modest
amount of medical care for the elderly
for the disabled for people who can't
make their way on their own and in many
cases have given a great deal of this
country the Vice President did call
Social Security a few years ago
basically our largely a welfare program
it isn't it's a contract between
generations it's something that we pay
into now so that we will have a secure
retirement and our parents and
grandparents will have us secure
retirement it's a very sacred contract
and I believe in it so that's not where
we ought to go there are plenty of
places to cut there's lots we can do in
the Pentagon where dishonest contractors
have been lining their pockets at the
expense of the American taxpayer there
are
we certainly under give our farm
families a decent income without
spending twenty to twenty five billion
dollars a year in farm subsidies and I'm
sure we can do that that's where we
ought to go and those are the programs
that we got to review first one minute
for the vice president well let me let
me take him up on this question of farm
subsidies we have a fundamental
difference approach on agriculture he
favors this supply maintenance or
production controls he said that he's
been out in the state saying that in
these Midwestern states i don't i think
the farm bill that he criticizes was
good legislation outstanding legislation
and i believe the answer to the
agricultural economy is not to get the
government further involved but to do
what i'm is suggesting first place never
go back to that democratic grain embargo
that liberal democrat grain embargo that
Tanakh the markets right out from under
us and made mr. gorbachev say to me when
he was here how do I know you're
reliable suppliers we never should go
back to that and we ought to expand our
markets abroad we ought to have rural
enterprise zones we ought to move
forward swiftly on my ideas of ethanol
which would use more corn and therefore
make create a bigger market for our
agricultural products but let's not go
back and keep assailing a farm bill that
passed with overwhelming Democrat and
Republican support Farm payments are
going down because the agricultural
economy is coming back Margaret Warner
has a question for you mr. vice
president mr. vice president I'd like to
cover a subject that wasn't covered in
the first debate you have dissent in
this campaign I am an environmentalist
and described yourself as having zero
tolerance for polluters and yet your
record does seem to suggest otherwise
when you were head of the president's
Task Force on regulatory relief you did
urge EPA to relaxed regulations
involving the elimination of lead from
gasoline
I believe you urged suspension of rules
requiring industries to treat toxic
waste before discharging them in sewers
and your group also urged OSHA to weaken
the regulations requiring that workers
be informed of dangerous chemicals at
the worksite finally I believe you did
the President's veto of the Clean Water
Act and my question is aren't you how do
you square your campaign rhetoric with
this record ninety percent reductions in
lead since I chaired that regulatory
task force ninety percent it's all
multi-member that expression get the
lead out it's almost out almost gone
clean water I'm for clean water but what
I am NOT for what I'm not for is
measuring it the way that the Democratic
Congress does we set up a good bill on
clean water a sound bill on clean water
but the only way you can express your
love for clean water is to double the
appropriations for clean water and then
rant against the deficit I am for clean
water I've been an outdoorsman and a
sportsman all my life I've been to these
national parks I led for the bro wallop
bill or what formerly Dingell Johnson I
headed the task force when I was a
member that Congress way back in a sixth
late 60s on on these kinds of things on
the Republican side I led for that and
so I know I refuse to measure ones
commitment as to whether you're gonna
double the spending that is the same ol
argument they've gotten us into the
trouble on the deficit side so I'll just
keep saying I am one I I'm not gonna go
down there and try to dump the sludge
from Massachusetts off the beaches off
of New Jersey I'm not gonna do that that
boo is excessively like can you add five
seconds burning give me five this guy
this is too much down it but I'm not
gonna do that I am an environmentalist I
believe in our parks I believe in the
President's Commission on outdoors and
I'll do a good job because I am
committed governor Dukakis you have one
minute to respond
margit I'm not sure I can get all of
this in in one minute George we have
Supply Management today under the 1985
bill it's called set asides secondly if
you were so opposed the grain embargo
why did you ask the godfather of the
grain embargo to be one of your top
foreign policy advisors I'm against the
grain mover it was a mistake I'm also
against the pipeline embargo which you
folks attempted to impose that was a
mistake as well and cost thousands of
jobs for American workers in the Midwest
and in all over the United States of
America
Margaret once again I don't know which
George Bush I'm talking about here or
looking at the George Bush who was a
charter member of the environmental
wrecking crew that went to Washington in
the early 80s and did a job in the EPA
or the one we'd been seeing and
listening to the past two or three
months but let me say this because he
spent millions millions of dollars in
advertising on the subject of Boston
Harbor George Boston Harbor was polluted
for a hundred years I'm the first
governor to clean it up no thanks to you
thanks to you and we've been cleaning it
up for four years we passed landmark
legislation in 84 no thanks - you did
everything you could to kill the Clean
Water Act and those grants governor's
make it possible for states and local
communities to clean up rivers and
harbors and schools
[Applause]
I'm Gloria Mitchell has a question for
you mr. vice president mr. vice
president jimmy carter has called this
the worst campaign ever Richard Nixon
has called it trivial superficial and in
name whoever started down this road
first of negative campaigning the
American people from all reports coming
to us are completely fed up now do you
have any solutions to suggest is there
time left to fix it
there are 26 days left for instance
would you agree to another debate before
it's all over so that the American
people would have another chance before
Election Day to compare YouTube no I
will not agree to another debate the
American people are up to here with
debates they had 30 of them we had seven
of them now we got got three of them I
am going to carry this election debate
all across this country in the last
whatever remains of the last three and a
half weeks or whatever we have and the
answer is no I am NOT going to have any
more debates we don't need any more
debates I've spelled out my position in
terms of negative campaigning you know I
don't want to sound like a kid in the
schoolyard he started it but to take a
look at the Democratic convention take a
look at it do you remember the senator
from Boston chanting out there and the
ridicule factor from that lady from
Texas that was on there I mean come on
this was just outrageous but I'll try it
okay harder to keep it on a high plane
but let me let me if you could accept a
little criticism I went all across
central Illinois and spoke about
agricultural issues and about seven
stops we had some fun Crystal Gayle
Loretta Lynn with us and I get up and
sang with the little towns that talk to
agriculture and not one thing did I see
with respect on your network about my
views on agriculture and not one did I
read in a newspaper why because you're
so interested in a poll that might have
been coming out or because somebody had
said something nasty about somebody else
and so I
know what the answer is I don't know any
somebody hit me and said barry goldwater
said you ought to talk on issues more
how can Barry go what are sitting in
Arizona know whether I'm talking on the
issues or not when we put out position
paper after position paper he puts out
position paper after position paper and
we see this much about it because
everyone else is fascinated with polls
and who's up or down today and who's
gonna be up or down tomorrow so I think
we can all share with respect in the
fact that maybe these the message is not
getting out but it's not getting out
because they're too few debates there
will be no more debates governor Dukakis
you have one minute to respond sir I can
understand after the vice-presidential
debate why mr. Bush would want no more
debates
that's my five seconds Andrew I think we
both have a responsibility to try to
address the issues yes we have
fundamental differences I think a great
many of them have come out today and I
think if we get rid of the labels and
I'm not keeping count but I think mr.
Bush has used the label liberal at least
10 times I had a dollar George for every
time you use that label I qualify for
one of those tax breaks for the rich you
want to give away isn't that the point
most Americans believe in basic values
we have differences about how to achieve
them I want to move forward
I want this nation to move forward I'm
concerned about the fact that 10% of our
manufacturing and 20% of our banking
nearly half of the real estate in the
city of Los Angeles are in the hands of
foreign investors I'm concerned about
what that does to our future I'm
concerned about the fact that so many of
our securities are in the hands of
foreign banks because of these massive
deficits but those are the issues of
which we ought to be debating and
governor just put away the flag
factories and the balloons and those
kinds of things and get on to a real
discussion of these issues I think we'll
enjoy a Mitchell has a question for you
governor Dukakis aundrea Mitchell has a
question for you sir
well we're talking about issue so let's
return to something you said earlier
about the modernization of land-based
missiles you said that you didn't rule
it out but that there are limits to what
we can spend and then you went on to
talk about a much more expensive part of
our defense strategy namely conventional
forces do you somehow see conventional
forces as a substitute for our strategic
forces and in not talking about the
land-based missiles and not committing
to modernizing do you somehow believe
that we can have a survivable nuclear
force based on the air and sea legs of
our triad I think we ought to be looking
at modernization I think we ought to be
exploring less expensive ways to get it
on land and we ought to make sure that
we have an effective and strong and
credible nuclear deterrent but we also
need well equipped and well well trained
and well supported conventional forces
and every defense expert I know
including people in the Pentagon itself
will tell you that given
level of dispensed defense spending and
the level of Defense Appropriations
which the Congress has now proved the
president has signed there's no way that
you can do all of these things and do
them well
that's why tough choices will be
required choices I'm prepared to make
mr. Bush is not prepared to me but
Andrea I think we can go far beyond this
as well because we have opportunities
now step by step to bring down the level
of strategic weapons and get a test ban
treaty negotiate those conventional
force reductions I would challenge mr.
Gorbachev to join with us in limiting
and eliminating regional conflict in the
Middle East in Central America
let's get him working on Syria their
client state and see if we can't get
them to join Israel and other Arab
nations if at all possible and Arab
leaders and finally bringing peace to
that troubled region and I think that's
one reason why we need fresh leadership
in the White House that can make
progress now bringing peace for the
Middle East let's go to work and in this
fiasco in Central America failed policy
which is actually increased Cuban and
Soviet influence the Democratic leaders
of Central and Latin America want to
work with us I've met with them I know
them I've spent time in South America I
speak the language so to Senator Benson
we want to work with them and build a
new relationship and they with us but
not a one of those key Democratic
leaders support our policy in Central
America and we've got to work with them
if we're going to create an environment
for human rights and democracy for the
people of this hemisphere and go to work
on our single most important problem and
that is the avalanche of drugs that is
pouring into our country and virtually
destroying those countries those are the
kinds of priorities for national
security and for foreign policy that I
want to pursue mr. Bush and I have major
differences other issues and I hope very
much to be present in proceeding mr.
vice president you have one minute and
in terms of regional tensions we have
now gotten the attention of the Soviet
Union and the reason we've gotten it is
because they see us now is unwilling to
make the very kinds of unilateral cuts
that have been called for and to go for
the discredited freeze my opponent had
trouble criticized us on our policy in
Angola
it now looks because of steady
negotiation that we may have an
agreement that will remove the Cubans
from Angola we see the Russians coming
out of Afghanistan that wouldn't have
stopped if we hadn't been willing
wouldn't have even started the cube the
Soviets coming out if we hadn't even
been willing to support the freedom
fighters there and the policy in Central
America regrettably has failed because
the Congress has been unwilling to
support those who have been fighting for
freedom those Sandinistas came in and
betrayed the trust of the revolution
they said it was about democracy and
they have not done nothing other than
solidify their marxist domination over
that country and Compton for governor to
caucus governor nuclear weapons need
nuclear material replenished on a
regular basis and just this week yet
another nuclear manufacturing plant was
closed because of safety concerns some
of the Pentagon feared that too much
priority has been put on new weapons
programs not enough on current programs
and worried that the resulting shortage
would be amounting to nothing less than
unilateral nuclear disarmament is that a
priority that you feel has been ignored
by this administration or the Pentagon
officials making too much of it well
it's a great concern of mine and I think
of all Americans and perhaps the vice
president can tell us what's been going
on this is another example of misplaced
priorities of an administration which
wants to spend billions on weapons
systems that we don't need and can't
afford and now confronts us with a very
serious problem in plants that are
supposed to be producing tritium and
plutonium and providing the necessary
materials for existing weapons yes if we
don't do something about it we may find
ourselves unilaterally if I may use that
term dismantling some of these weapons
what's been going on who's been in
charge who's been managing this system
why have there been these safety
violations why are these plants being
closed down I don't know what the latest
cost estimates are but it's going to be
in the range of 25 50 75 hundred billion
dollars now somebody has to bear the
responsibility for this may be the vice
president has an answer but I'm somebody
who believes very strongly in taking
care of the fundamentals for
before you start new stuff and that's
something which will be a priority of
ours in a new administration because
without it we cannot have the effective
and strong and credible nuclear
deterrent we must have mr. vice
president you have one minute that is
the closest I've ever heard the governor
of Massachusetts come to support
anything having to do with nuclear
that's about as close as I've ever heard
him yes this Savannah River plant meet
needs to be made more safe will he join
me in suggesting that we may need
another plant
maybe in Idaho to take care of the
requirements nuclear material
requirements for our Defense Department
I hope he will this sounds like real
progress here because we've had a big
difference on the safe use of nuclear
power for our energy base I believe that
we must use clean safe nuclear power I
believe that we the more dependent we
become on foreign oil the less our
national security is enhanced and
therefore I've made some proposals to
strengthen the domestic oil energy
industry by more incentive going in to
look for and find and produce oil made
him some incentives in terms of
secondary and tertiary production but
we're gonna have to use more gas
more coal and more safe nuclear power
for our energy base so I am one who
believes that we can let's do what he's
talking about now Ann Compton has a
question for you mr. vice president as
many as a hundred officials in this
administration have left the government
under an ethical cloud some have been
indicted some convicted many of the
cases have involved undue influence once
they are outside of government if you
become president will you lock that
revolving door that has allowed some men
and women in the government to come back
and lobby the very departments they once
managed yanno applied to Congress to
I'll do both I'll do both because I
think you see I am one who I get kidded
by being a little old-fashioned on these
things but I do believe in public
service I believe that public service is
honorable and I don't think anybody has
a has a call on people in their
administrations going astray his chief
education adviser is in jail
he's in jail because he betrayed the
public trust the head of education and
yet this man
the governor equated the president to a
rotting fish he said that a fish rots
from the head down as he was going after
ed Meese look we need the highest
possible ethical standards
I will have an ethical office in the
White House that will be under the
president's personal concern I will see
that these standards apply to the United
States Congress I hope I will do a good
job is one who has had a relatively
clean record with no conflicts of
interest in his own public life as has
the governor to exhort young people to
get into public service but there is no
corner on on this sleaze factor believe
me and it's a disgrace and I will do my
level best to clean it up
recognizing that you can't legislate
morality but I do believe that with my
record in Congress having led the new
congressman to a code of ethics through
major main emphasis on it in full
disclosure that I've got a good record
and there are more if you want to talk
about percentage appointments more
members of Congress who have been under
investigation percentage-wise than
people in the executive branch and so it
isn't one in state governments have had
a tough time his some of these college
presidents aren't exactly holier than
now so let's let's not be throwing
stones about it let's say this isn't
democrat or republican and it isn't
liberal or conservative let's vow to
work together to do something about
[Music]
governor do you have one minute to
respond and I would agree that integrity
is not a Republican for a democratic
issue it's an American issue but here
again I don't know which George Bush I'm
listening to wasn't this the mr. Bush
that supported mr. Meese call James Watt
an excellent Secretary of the Interior
provided support for some of these
people supported the nomination of
Robert Bork the Supreme Court of the
United States we've had dozens we've had
dozens and dozens of officials in this
administration who have left under a
cloud who have left with a special
prosecutor in their arm have been
indicted convicted this isn't the kind
of administration we need and one of the
reasons our selection of a running mate
is so important and is such a test of
the kinds of standards we'll set is
because it tells the American people in
advance of the election just what kind
of people were looking for I picked Boyd
Benson mr. Bush pick Dan Quayle Dan
Quayle I think that says a great deal of
the American people about the standards
we'll set and the quality of the people
that we will pick to serve in argument
- each of you candidates regrettably I
have to inform you that we have come to
the end of our questions that's a pity
before I ask the candidates to make
their closing remarks on behalf of the
Commission on Presidential Debates I
would like to thank all of you for
joining us this evening governor Dukakis
yours is the first closing statement sir
28 years ago was a young man just
graduated from law school I came to this
city came clear across the country to
watch John Kennedy be nominated the
presidency of the United States right
here in Los Angeles I never dreamed that
someday I would win that nomination and
be my party's nominee president that's
America that's why I'm proud and
grateful to be a citizen of this country
26 days from today you and millions of
Americans will choose two people to lead
us into the future as president and vice
president the United States our
opponents say things are okay don't rock
the boat not to worry they say we should
be satisfied but I don't think we can be
satisfied when we're spending a hundred
and fifty billion dollars a year and
interest alone in the national debt much
of it going to foreign bankers or when
25 percent of our high school students
are dropping out of school or when we
have two and a half million of our
fellow citizens a third of them veterans
who are homeless and living on streets
and in doorways in this country or when
mr. Bush's prescription for our economic
future is another tax giveaway to the
rich we can do better than that
not working with government alone but
all of us working together Lloyd Bentsen
and I are optimist and so are the
American people we ask you for our hand
for your hands and in your hearts and
your votes on the 8th of November so we
can move forward in the future
kitty and I are very grateful to all of
you for the warmth and the hospitality
that you've given to us in your homes
and communities all across this country
we love you and we're grateful to you
for everything that you've given to us
and we hope that we'll be serving you in
the White House in January of 1989 thank
you
[Music]
Vice President Bush your closing
statement sometimes it does seem that a
campaign generates more heat than light
so let me repeat I do have respect for
my opponent for his family for the
justifiable pride he takes in his
heritage but we have enormous
differences I want to hold the line on
taxes and keep this the longest
expansion in modern history going until
everybody in America benefits I want to
invest in our children because I mean it
when I say I want a kinder and gentler
nation and by that I want to have
childcare where the families the parents
have controlled I want to keep our
neighborhoods much much better in terms
of anti-crime and that's why I would
appoint judges that have a little more
sympathy for the victims of crime and a
little less for the criminals that's why
I do feel if some police officer is
gunned down that the death penalty is
required I want to help those with
disabilities fit into the mainstream
there is much to be a be done this
election is about big things and perhaps
the biggest is world peace and I asked
you to consider the experience I have
had in working with a president who has
revolutionized the situation around the
world America stands tall again and as a
result we are credible and we have now
achieved a historic arms control
agreement I want to build on that I'd
love to be able to say to my
grandchildren four years after my first
term I'd like to say your grandfather
working with the leaders of the Soviet
Union working with the leaders of Europe
was able to ban chemical and biological
weapons from the face of the earth
Lincoln called this country the last
best hope of man on earth and he was
right then and we still are the last
best hope of man on earth and I ask for
your support November 8th and I will be
a good president working together we can
do wonderful things for the United
States and for the free world thank you
very very much
[Applause]
[Music]